+++
title = "In Defense of Filler"
date = 2022-11-05

[taxonomies]
categories = ["weird"]
tags = ["placeholder posts", "tag3"]
+++

# Avatar: The Last Airbender and its Second Form of Narrative

What can be said that hasn’t already been said about Avatar: The Last Airbender? 
I remember when it first premiered on Nickelodeon. Somehow I got it in my brain that the exploits of a boy trapped a hundred years in an iceberg to emerge with his giant flying bison, equipped with the power to control all elements, but the last to have the skill of Airbending, was a straight-to-tv movie. Only after befriending Waterbenders and eluding Firebenders only to hit the open sea towards the Pangea-like continent of the Earthbenders and presumably new adventures, did I realize even for the time, my lack of attention had the potential to ruin more than just a very confusing hour of cartoons. Post-roll ads for more than I could ever ask for promised that American animation would never be the same, and the generation I was only connected to by a barely high-speed internet let me know how important this show was. 

Now with a full series of Avatar Aang’s exploits, a full sequel series concerning his successor (his avatar in every sense), and an assortment of comics and novels, Avatar: The Last Airbender (A:TLA) is cemented in the canon of American cartoons. While this series is often treated as a start to the whole tradition of Japanese-inspired American Animation (modern examples could include The Dragon Prince, the Castlevania series, or the revamped Voltron: Legendary Defenders), it stands with contemporaries including Teen Titans in the United States, Totally Spies in France and Canada, and Code Lyoko in France proper, along with many others. The things that made Japanese animation special, be it visual style, firmer insistence on serialized storytelling, darker more adult themes, were seeping into the west through many different avenues. Still, A:TLA holds a G.O.A.T. status, and the question remains what made this show so special to so many people roughly my age?

If I were to try and answer that question, I would tread on so much of my initial worry in this series: I’d say what’s already been said. What I much rather do is focus on one aspect of this series, and how it contributes to A:TLA’s identity as a series, but to find that, we must look at its sequel series: Legend of Korra.
There was plenty Legend of Korra had in common with the original series. The same showrunners and much of the same writing staff and animation teams were returning to the series, ensuring audience assurance that hasn’t been successfully replicated since (though we do hold hope). This doesn’t mean that Legend of Korra was going to stay exactly the same. What stuck out to me most was how during the buildup for Legend of Korra, news about the series’ production specifically called out the “filler episodes” of the original series. Legend of Korra was going to have much fewer episodes per season than A:TLA, so according to the showrunners, this show had to be paced more densely. The result was that any potential filler episode was either cut or, at best, integrated into the primary plotline. For example, all of the romantic subplots of Season 1 of Legend of Korra, generally came together from quick beats in the first half of the season, a single episode focused on romantics, the best ugly-cry to be animated to this day, and a swift transition to the backend of the season which promptly made everyone too busy to care about such trivial things as… being teenagers. 

Even with 20/20 hindsight, seeing A:LoK moved to less profitable timeslots until being relegated to Nickelodeon’s attempt at a streaming service, I doubt they could have made a series with the same pacing as A:TLA. Even after rewatching both recently, I honestly think they did their best with Korra (though that’s a story for another day). That being said, I’d like to take a look at these “filler episodes” that were seen as so disposable in LOK. I think we’ll find, through use of some simple interpretive tools, how important these filler episodes are to the structure of the show as a whole. For all Avatar: The Last Airbender did, it never wasted the viewers time. The reason for this is very simple: there are no real filler episodes.

When I mean Filler Episodes in A:TLA, I mean those that are not necessary for moving forward the main seasonal plot. There are several episodes where the main cast of globetrotting tweens are either posted up in one particular town they’re visiting or taking the long way around for some contrived reason, with the plot being contained in overcoming this more frustrated path (bad-guy nation has some war machines that make flying on their sky-bison difficult in that particular skyspace for the next little bit, etc.). The story behind filler episodes in other shows tend to be a result of how the business works. Sometimes your studio gets an order for 24 episodes when you only outlined 12. That’s good news, since you have a job for twice as long as you planned, but it means you need something to fill in those gaps. An excellent example of this stretching to absurd levels is the production of the show LOST. Conversely you could be keeping up with a comic source, like Naruto, which released a 24-page chapter every week that the TV show released a 24-minute episode, with no regular seasonal breaks. Since most pages in a comic do not equal a minute in real-time, the animation studio pretty quickly caught up to the comic in its plot and had to make anime-original stories that didn’t disrupt the status quo at the time, but bought them time as the comic generated enough plot for them to actually adapt. 

The problem is that these reasons are seldom “because they wanted to make a good episode and slowing down the plot for an episode or two seemed like the best way to do it.” that’s not to disparage filler episodes in LOST or Naruto, but more to emphasize that for A:TLA, that *was* the reason they added them in. Because they had a vision for these episodes initially, each one is filled with some of the best parts of the story. What I’d like to do is go through these episodes and show how slowing down the plot to focus on the characters as they go through smaller more contained stories, really benefitted A:TLA, and that this difference in pacing, from the mainline episodes to the filler episodes, gives this show a firm sense of freedom and security in how it tells its story. 

So how are we going to decide what’s a filler episode? We can’t just compare it to the comic like Naruto.

## The Rules

To know what the Filler Episodes are for Avatar: The Last Airbender, we must know the plot in its barest form. This may prove bumpy because the goals for each of the protagonists are internally motivated, so bleed into every episode they’re in someway/somehow. So let’s establish what the bare plot of A:TLA is and from that we can determine what the filler is. If you have seen the series, feel free to let me know how bad my definitions are in the comment section I don’t have.

**Avatar Aang**: This 12-year-old boy is the most recent successor to the personhood of The Avatar. Unlike the rest of the world, where everyone could potentially manipulate only one of the four elements (or none, that’s an option), the Avatar has the potential to master “bending” all 4 elements: water, fire, earth, and air. From what we know, Aang’s the only recognized character benefitting from reincarnation (we do not know what happens to other people after death with one exception in Legend of Korra and it’s never addressed besides. This fact could be distracting, but only if you let it), meaning there have been countless lives before Aang who have also mastered the 4 elements, each standing alone as a sort of go-between for the four nations that each have cultural institutions around bending each of these elements individually (more like three in Aang’s time because one of them all got killed once?).

For our purposes, Aang’s story is becoming a fully realized Avatar. Why this the main plot for him instead of trying to defeat the Big Bad Firelord? Because 1) These two things happen at the same time anyways and 2) Team Avatar tries to have a linear conflict with the Fire Nation and it just doesn’t work for the bulk of the series because they’re like twelve and the Fire Lord has the most highly industrialized colonial force on the planet. The thing that does happen in a pretty straightforward pattern is learning to be the Avatar (there are exceptions, but we’ll get to that).

**Prince Zuko**: This 16-year-old boy is the crown prince of the Fire Nation, of which the Fire Lord from before is the Fire Lord. While Zuko is the son of the primary villain of the show, tasked with capturing Avatar Aang, and a prickly pair any way you cut him, Zuko is better described as a second main character than a real villain. Zuko has his own arc found not only in trying to capture the Avatar, but what happens along the way and, eventually, what happens after. 

Because his quest to capture the Avatar is not a plot that lasts in such a simple form through the course of the show, we’ll keep the end in mind for Zuko as we did for Aang: Zuko’s story is in becoming the sort of person who can be the next Fire Lord.

I bring these both up because there is a chance some episodes will be filler (read also: character driven) for one of these characters but progress the plot with another. It is when neither character is truly growing that an episode will be the focus of discussion on this blog.

These are, of course, not the only two characters who grow tremendously within the plot of the show, but thankfully, with minimal exception, the rest of the cast does decide to grow mostly while either Aang or Zuko (mostly Aang) do.

We’ll try to update the rules as we go, but for the purposes of Season 1, each can be summed up thus:

Aang is given the task of mastering all four elements to defeat the Fire Lord before Sozin’s comet (a comet… named after a guy named Sozin. You learn about him, don’t worry about it) returns across the sky, enabling the Fire Nation to cause irreparable harm. The Avatar’s first step in this is traveling from the South Pole to the North Pole to learn waterbending. The first of three elements he doesn’t know yet.

Zuko has finally found the Avatar after being the third generation of Fire Lord to search for him (Remember that iceberg from like the first part up there? Aang was in that. And like, there were ocean currents that moved him around—I’m over explaining, this isn’t a blog about how oceans work). Now that the Avatar has gotten out of the iceberg and is around and disturbing the peace Zuko means to capture him to restore his honor and atone for being rude once (no I’m not lying, we’ll get to it), but some Fire Nation Man with a Job Captain Admiral Zhou seeks to capture the Avatar for his own honor, possibly becoming whatever is the next step from Admiral (Wikipedia says it’s “Very Big Admiral”). Zuko must outpace the seasoned military man who probably has a pension in order to capture the Avatar and restore his own honor.

When I explain it like that, one could argue “yeah, those both seem like full shows. If we focus on their journeys, we’re probably gonna have enough things to do.” Well sir/madam/nonbinary erratum, these are the focus of half* the episodes in Season 1. The rest is Filler, and it’s in this filler we’re going to get some real literary juice.

This is a special show, and like the best media for Young Adults, it can be used to teach young media watchers how to enjoy storytelling in deep ways they’ll be hungry for after viewing, so that’s what we’re going to do here. The next post will be discussing the Warriors of Kiyoshi, no matter how essential those who watched this show believe it to be.

So until next time, have.. fun….. w-with your… dayyyyy.
